                             SALIENT FEATURES
                                 BUDGET 2026-27
                               CUSTOMS ACT 1969

1.   GUIDING PRINCIPLES:
        Strategic tariff rationalization via the National Tariff Policy (NTP) 2025-30.
        Simplification, trade facilitation, and enhancement of system efficiency.
        Targeted public health relief and economic stimulus for key sectors.
2.   TARIFF RATIONALIZATION (NTP 2025-30):
        Reduction of the existing Customs Duty (CD) from 20% to 15% and 10%,
         existing 15% and 10% to 10% and 5%, and existing 5% to 0% respectively for
         input goods of different industrial sectors on 92 tariff lines.
3.   REDUCTION IN ADDITIONAL CUSTOMS DUTY (ACD) RATES:
        Reduction of ACD from 6% to 4% on 449 Tariff Lines.
        Reduction of ACD from 4% to 2% on 2,107 Tariff Lines.
        Elimination of ACD from 2% to 0% on 569 Tariff Lines.
4.   REVIEW OF REGULATORY DUTY (RD) REGIME:
        RD greater than 20% are brought down and capped at 20% for 359 Tariff
         Lines.
        20% reduction on all RD rates between 2.5% and 20% across 1,347 Tariff
         Lines.
        RD rates of 2.5%, 2% and 1% are reduced by 20% or completely eliminated –
         208 Tariff Lines
5.   REVIEW OF EXEMPTION REGIME (FIFTH SCHEDULE):
        Deletion of entries from the Fifth Schedule where concessionary CD equals or
         exceeds the First Schedule general tariff.
        Exemption of CD on critical cancer-related Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients
         (APIs) under the Fifth Schedule.
        Reduction of Customs Duty from 20% to 10% on specialized construction-
         related vehicles for construction sector.
        Exemption of CD on import on Defence Imports.
                                                                                          1
6.    Exemption of CD, ACD and RD on import of Agricultural Machinery.
7.    Exemption of CD on import of bullet proof vehicles for Shanghai Cooperation
      Organization Summit and for the import of bullet proof vehicles by Federal or
      Provincial government, for the on-going war against terrorism.
8.    15 new PCT Codes created and description of 2 PCT Codes amended for trade
      facilitation and statistical purposes.
9.    State warehouses authorized by Collector of Customs have been defined to bring
      legal clarity in the type of warehouses.
10.   To remove a legal lacuna, it has been clarified that the threshold of exemption for
      framing of misdeclaration case shall be irrespective of the number of Goods
      declaration involved and shall only be limited by the amount of revenue involved;
      by removing the words “in a case”.
11.   Scanning of cargo has been given legal cover to facilitate non-intrusive process of
      “Scanning” under the Act.
12.   The Board is authorized to rationalize the penalties and prescribe appeal
      mechanism and exempt specified class of goods or Customs stations from such
      penalty through Rules; for delayed GD filing/clearance of goods at ports, and also
      authorized Collectors to reduce such penalties.
13.   The Board may authorize any person, as defined under the Customs Act, to
      conduct auctions of auctionable goods in the prescribed manner, thereby
      improving efficiency and transparency.
14.   The maximum penalty on terminal operators for failure to honor Delay Detention
      Certificates issued by Customs has been increased from Rs. 500,000 to Rs. 10
      million.
15.   A new penal clause added to prescribe specific penalty for unauthorized removal
      and misappropriation of goods from customs state warehouses.
16.   An explanation is introduced for legal clarity of the word, “removal” which shall
      include carrying, transporting, depositing, harboring, keeping, concealing, retailing,
      or any other act facilitating the movement or possession of smuggled goods.




                                                                                          2
17.   Any authority is now required to hand over seized goods liable to confiscation to
      the Customs authorities for proceedings under the Customs Act, irrespective of
      any pending proceedings under any other law for the time being in force with
      corresponding change in its penal clause.
18.   Faceless Adjudication introduced to avoid face to face interaction between
      adjudicating officer and the respondents through virtual proceedings to enhance
      transparency, efficiency and quick disposal of cases.
19.   Special Judges is being empowered to freeze assets of accused persons involved
      in illegal transfer of funds into or out of Pakistan to prevent dissipation of their
      assets during trial.
20.   Independent Case Scrutiny Committees being introduced to examine and decide
      matters relating to filing of appeals before courts to avoid frivolous litigation.
21.   Provision has been introduced allowing service of summons through newspaper
      publication where the accused person is not traceable.

                                             ***




                                                                                           3
                              SALIENT FEATURES

                                   BUDGET 2026-27
                               SALES TAX ACT 1990


The proposed budgetary measures pertaining to Sales Tax for FY 2026-27 are:


1. RELIEF MEASURES
         i.   Grant of exemption from sales tax to magazines
        ii.   Extension in exemption on import of CKD for electric vehicles till 30.06.2027
       iii.   Enhancement in scope of exemption on parts of aircrafts for import and
              lease by M/s PIACL
       iv.    Withdrawal of exemption of sales tax on family planning devices
        v.    Abolition of tampon tax
       vi.    Exemption of sales tax to boost strategic investment in shipping
       vii.   Exemption to strategic imports for SCO summit and counter terrorism
      viii.   Exemption of sales tax on import of capital goods for upgradation and
              overhaul of existing refineries.
       ix.    Addition of new S. No. in the Sixth Schedule
        x.    Extension in date of sunset for electric vehicles till 30.06.2027


2. REVENUE MEASURES
         i.   Expansion of Third Schedule to ensure payment of sales tax at consumer
              price by the manufacturers at manufacturing stage
        ii.   Withholding of sales tax by the toll manufacturers from unregistered buyers
       iii.   Enhancement in scope of withholding sales tax by AOPs and individuals
              from unregistered persons
       iv.    Imposition/recovery of 3% VAT from the manufacturers if the imported raw
              material is sold in same state
        v.    Rationalization of amount of penalty on certain offences and inclusion of
              three more offences in section 33 for imposition of penalty

                                                                                          4
3. STREAMLINING MEASURES
        i.   Insertion definition of advance receipt invoice, algorithmic settlement
             mechanism, electronic invoicing system, national faceless centre and
             production monitoring system
       ii.   Streamlining of definition tier-1 retailers. Inclusion of retailer having two
             hundred million or more annual turnover, in the category of tier-1 retailer
      iii.   Insertion of explanation to clarify the time of delivery of goods to the
             recipient
      iv.    Grant of power to Board to outsource the function of valuation of goods
       v.    Addition of new proviso in section 6 to impose tax on steel sector on the
             basis of monthly electricity units consumed
      vi.    Addition of new proviso in section 8B to enhance or decrease limit of input
             tax adjustment
     vii.    Insertion of proviso in section 9 for adjustment through issuance of debit
             and credit notes electronically.
     viii.   Insertion of new section 11H for faceless audit and assessment.
      ix.    Substitution of sub-section (2) of section 21 to discourage fake/flying
             invoices and fraudulent activities
       x.    Substitution of sub-section (1) of section 23 for issuance of invoice against
             exempt supplies also.
      xi.    Insertion of new sub-section (8A) in section 25 for audit by the Chartered
             Accountant or Cost and Management Accountant
     xii.    Insertion of section 30AA – faceless jurisdiction
     xiii.   Insertion of section 30DDDB for establishment of Directorate General (Field
             Compliance) by Inland Revenue
    xiv.     Insertion of new section 32C for creation of National Faceless centre
     xv.     Substitution of section (2) and (3) of 40C for production monitoring system
             and video analytic
    xvi.     Addition of new sub-section (6) in section 40C for seizure and confiscation
             of goods without affixing tax stamps, stickers etc.
    xvii.    Insertion of new section 40F for auction of confiscation goods

                                                                                           5
xviii.   Insertion of section 45C – faceless appeal procedure
 xix.    Insertion of section 47AA – Algorithmic Settlement Mechanism
  xx.    Insertion of section 47AAA – Independent case scrutiny committee
 xxi.    Addition of new sub-section (3) of section 56B for maintaining centralized
         directory
xxii.    Addition of proviso under Twelfth Schedule to restrict sale of imported same
         state goods.
                                      ***




                                                                                    6
                             SALIENT FEATURES
                                BUDGET 2026-27
                       INCOME TAX ORDINANCE 2001
1. RELIEF MEASURES:

     i.     Reduction in tax rates for salaried individuals: Income tax rates for
            salaried taxpayers have been reduced through restructuring of tax slabs.
            Additional intermediate slabs have been introduced and the threshold for
            the maximum tax rate of 35% has been increased from Rs. 4.1 million to
            Rs. 7 million.

     ii.    Abolition of tax on deemed income from immovable property: Section
            7E, relating to taxation of deemed income from capital assets situated in
            Pakistan, has been omitted.

     iii.   Rationalization of Super Tax: Super Tax has been abolished for persons
            having income of up to Rs. 500 million. The rate has been reduced from
            10% to 8% for persons having income of more than Rs. 500 million.
            However, these concessions do not apply to banking, ENP and fertilizer
            sectors.

     iv.    Reduction in advance tax on sale and purchase of immovable
            property: Advance tax rates under sections 236C (4.5 to 5.5 percent) and
            236K (1.5 to 2.5 percent) have been reduced and converted into lower flat
            rates of 2.75% and 1.5% to encourage documentation and facilitate
            transactions in the real estate sector.

     v.     Rationalization of tax collection from exporters: Tax collection on export
            proceeds (1% withholding tax and 1% advance tax) has been reduced from
            2 % to 1.25% in order to encourage exports.

     vi.    Extension of concessionary tax rate for IT and IT-enabled services
            exports: The reduced tax rate of 0.25% for exporters of IT and IT-enabled
            services has been extended from 2026 up to Tax Year 2029.


                                                                                    7
vii.    Reduction in tax on foreign payments through cards: Advance tax on
        foreign remittances made through debit, credit and prepaid cards has been
        reduced from 5% to 0.5%.

viii.   Adjustability of tax on e-commerce transactions: Tax deducted on e-
        commerce transactions shall be adjustable for sellers having turnover
        exceeding Rs.200 million.

ix.     Tax credit for integration with FBR systems: A tax credit equal to 10%
        of the investment made in electronic resources for integration with FBR’s
        computerized systems has been introduced to facilitate documentation and
        digital compliance.

x.      Withdrawal of advance tax on foreign TV plays and advertisements:
        Advance tax on payments for foreign television plays and advertisements
        has been withdrawn.

xi.     Exemptions for welfare and charitable entities: Income tax exemption
        has been extended to specified charitable and welfare organizations
        including Pakistan Red Crescent Society, Shaheen Foundation, Bahria
        Foundation, SIUT and Dawat-e-Hadiya. These entities already had
        approval u/s 2(36) of the Ordinance and two exemption as available in
        Clause 66 of Part I of the First Schedule. This exemption facilitates the
        entities as they are not required to obtain exemption from the Commissioner
        every year.

xii.    Exemption for Special Purpose Vehicles under asset-backed
        securitization: Income of qualifying Special Purpose Vehicles established
        for asset-backed securitization has been exempted to facilitate capital
        market development.

xiii.   Facilitation for Resident Pakistanis on ownership of foreign moveable
        and immovable assets: Currently Capital Value Tax is being charged on
        foreign movable and immovable assets of resident Pakistanis. The same is
        proposed to be abolished.


                                                                                  8
    xiv.   Enhanced turnover threshold for withholding exemption of small
           traders: The turnover threshold for exemption from withholding tax for small
           traders has been increased from Rs. 100 million to Rs. 200 million.

    xv.    Automatic issuance of exemption certificates for whole year: Funds
           and eligible non-profit organizations meeting prescribed conditions shall be
           entitled to issuance of exemption certificates for the whole financial year.

    xvi.   Determination of cost of inherited immovable property and family
           settlements: The law has been clarified regarding determination of cost
           basis of inherited immovable property and tax treatment of family
           settlements after death.

2. REVENUE MEASURES:

    i.     Tax on sham life insurance policies: In order to discourage misuse of life
           insurance policies and to reduce arbitrage through sham life insurance
           policies, a tax has been proposed on such schemes.

    ii.    Withholding tax on income from social media platforms: A withholding
           tax regime has been introduced on revenues received by digital content
           creators and social media influencers from platforms such as YouTube,
           Facebook, Instagram and TikTok. Banking and financial institutions shall
           deduct tax on such receipts.

    iii.   Rationalization of withholding tax rates on services: The withholding
           tax structure on services has been revised. The rate for specified services
           has been enhanced, independent professionals have been separately
           categorized and rates for certain other services have been rationalized.

    iv.    Revision of minimum tax rate for distributors and wholesalers: The
           reduced minimum tax rate for distributors, dealers, sub-dealers and
           wholesalers of specified sectors has been increased from 0.25% to 0.5%,
           subject to prescribed documentation requirements.




                                                                                          9
     v.      Algorithmic cross-matching of banking and tax information: Banking
             companies and Electronic Money Institutions shall electronically provide
             information relating to high-value deposits and withdrawals for algorithmic
             comparison with tax declarations to identify significant mismatches and
             broaden the tax base.

     vi.     Strengthening of electronic integration of businesses: The Board has
             been empowered to require specified persons to install electronic resources
             and integrate business systems for real-time reporting of transactions.
             Failure to comply may result in disallowance of expenditure.

     vii.    Rationalization of penalty regime: Penalties for non-compliance,
             including failure to furnish statements, integration failures, late inclusion in
             ATL and incorrect withholding tax claims, have been enhanced to improve
             deterrence and adjust inflation.

     viii.   Application of Tenth Schedule to capital gains on listed securities: The
             exclusion available from enhanced tax rates applicable to non-ATL persons
             on capital gains from listed securities has been withdrawn to encourage tax
             compliance and return filing.



3. STREAMLINING MEASURES:

     i.      Establishment of National Faceless Centre: A National Faceless Centre
             is being established to conduct faceless audits, assessments and appeals
             through technology-driven processes, reducing taxpayer interface and
             enhancing transparency.

     ii.     Introduction of Algorithmic Settlement Mechanism: A new automated
             settlement mechanism has been introduced to allow taxpayers to settle
             identified discrepancies through a technology-based process without
             separate penalty or default surcharge.




                                                                                          10
iii.    Independent Case Scrutiny Committee: An independent mechanism has
        been introduced for scrutiny of departmental litigation to improve quality and
        consistency of tax litigation management.

iv.     Streamlining of Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR): The ADR
        framework has been revised to improve efficiency and facilitate quicker
        resolution of tax disputes.

v.      Streamlining     taxation     of   shipping   income    of   non-residents:
        Comprehensive provisions have been introduced to define Authorized
        Shipping Agents and strengthen taxation and compliance relating to non-
        resident shipping operations.

vi.     Streamlining computation of capital gains on listed securities: The role
        of NCCPL in computation and determination of capital gains on listed
        securities has been expanded and clarified.

vii.    Mandatory      electronic     filing   and    machine-readable      financial
        statements: Companies shall be required to submit financial statements in
        electronically readable formats to facilitate automated processing and
        analysis.

viii.   Special audit through accountants, cost accountants and actuaries:
        The Commissioner has been empowered to require re-audit, inventory
        valuation or actuarial valuation by independent experts in appropriate
        cases.

ix.     Engagement of audit experts and rationalization of disclosure
        provisions: The Board has been enabled to engage specialists and
        strengthen disclosure mechanisms to improve audit effectiveness and
        compliance.

x.      Establishment of Directorate General (Field Compliance), Inland
        Revenue: A dedicated Directorate General (Field Compliance) has been
        created to strengthen compliance functions.



                                                                                   11
xi.    Broadening of special procedure for small traders and shopkeepers:
       The scope of special procedures for small traders and shopkeepers has
       been expanded through amendments in section 99B.

xii.   Technical, consequential and administrative amendments: Various
       streamlining, administrative and consequential amendments have been
       made to improve clarity, implementation and administration of the Income
       Tax Ordinance, 2001.

                                      ***




                                                                             12
                              SALIENT FEATURES
                                  BUDGET 2026-27
                           FEDERAL EXCISE ACT 2005

The proposed budgetary measures pertaining to Federal Excise for FY 2026-27 are:


1.RELIEF MEASURES


        i.    Reduction in Federal Excise Duty on foreign travel
        ii.   Reduction in FED on import of acetate tow Rs. 44000 to Rs. 10000
       iii.   Removing Federal Excise Duty on WHO standard compliant sports/
              electrolytes replenishing beverages
       iv.    Exemption to strategic imports of vehicle for SCO summit and counter-
              terrorism
        v.    Extension of Exemption on Import of CKD kits for electric vehicles for one
              year extended to 30.06.2027


2. REVENUE MEASURES


        i.    Imposition of FED at Rs. 16500 from Rs. 10000 per kg e-liquid for electronic
              cigarettes. This measure also remove the highest possible tariff of 65% of
              the retail price imposed under the previous regime.
        ii.   Imposition of FED on Naphtha, solvent oil and turpentine etc.
       iii.   Imposition of FED on luxury EVs and other Luxury Vehicles
       iv.    Imposition of FED on base oil, base lubricating oil in addition to lubricating
              oil
        v.    Insertion of New Table 1A of the First Schedule to the Federal Excise Act,
              2005 for imposition of FED on luxury imported vehicles




                                                                                         13
3. STREAMLINING MEASURES


        i.   Insertion definition of advance receipt invoice, algorithmic settlement
             mechanism, electronic invoicing system, national faceless centre and
             production monitoring system
       ii.   Addition of New Section 7A, for adoption of Faceless Audit and Assessment
      iii.   Substitution of Sub-Section (1) of Section 18 for issuance of invoice for
             dutiable and zero-rated supply of goods
      iv.    Substitution of Sub-Section (4) of Section 19 – penalty for destruction of
             goods without approval of the Commissioner.
       v.    Substitution of Sub-Section (1) of Section 26 – seizure of counterfeited
             cigarette and beverages and other goods without tax stamp, barcodes etc.
      vi.    Substitution of Sub-Section (1) of Section 27 – seizure and destruction of
             counterfeited cigarettes and beverages
     vii.    Insertion of Section 34AA – establishment of Independent Case Scrutiny
             Committee
     viii.   Substitution of Section 45A of The Federal Excise Act, 2005 – monitoring
             or tracking by electronic or other means of excisable goods
      ix.    Insertion of New Sub-Section (3A) In Section 46, hiring of auditors or
             accountant for conducting for specialized where the Commissioner deem
             necessary on account of complexity of financial transaction
       x.    Addition of new entry in Second Schedule to make FED levied on above
             mentioned petroleum products in VAT mode


                                          ***




                                                                                    14
